Graph classification tutorial post (#781)
huggingface/blog: graphml-classification.md

---
title: "Graph Classification with Transformers" 
thumbnail: /blog/assets/125_intro-to-graphml/thumbnail_classification.png
---

# Graph classification with Transformers

<div class="blog-metadata">
    <small>Published January 30, 2023.</small>
    <a target="_blank" class="btn no-underline text-sm mb-5 font-sans" href="https://github.com/huggingface/blog/blob/main/graphml-classification.md">
        Update on GitHub
    </a>
</div>

<div class="author-card">
    <a href="/clefourrier"> 
        <img class="avatar avatar-user" src="https://aeiljuispo.cloudimg.io/v7/https://s3.amazonaws.com/moonup/production/uploads/1644340617257-noauth.png?w=200&h=200&f=face" title="Gravatar">
        <div class="bfc">
            <code>clefourrier</code>
            <span class="fullname">Clémentine Fourrier</span>
        </div>
    </a>
</div>

In the previous [blog](https://huggingface.co/blog/intro-graphml), we explored some of the theoretical aspects of machine learning on graphs. This one will explore how you can do graph classification using the Transformers library.

> At the moment, the only graph transformer model available in Transformers is Microsoft's Graphormer, so this is the one we will use here. We are looking forward to seeing what other models people will use and integrate :hugging_face:

Reviewer: Very nice!

* Link the Graphormer paper? 
* Maybe also link the issue thread where you were gathering people's interest to contribute graph models to the library?

Author: Linking the Graphormer paper, but people interest manifested in [several](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/issues/20962) [issues](https://github.com/huggingface/blog/issues/767) and I feel it would be confusing to link them all

## Requirements

> To follow this tutorial, you need to have installed `datasets` and `transformers` (version >= **TODO**).

Author: Must not forget to update this!!

Reviewer: Maybe this?

```
pip install -q -U datasets git+https://github.com/huggingface/transformers
```

This way, the users will always have the latest stable release of `datasets` installed and the latest nightly build of `transformers` from the source.

Author: The PR has been merged in transformers 4.26, do you think we should still request people to pull the nightly?

Reviewer: No then no need. Just installing the latest Transformers version do it.

## Data

> To use graph data, you can either start from your own datasets, or use [those available on the Hub][https://huggingface.co/graphs-datasets). We'll focus on using already available ones, but feel free to add your datasets!

Reviewer: > https://huggingface.co/graphs-datasets

🤯

Reviewer: > We'll focus on using already available ones, but feel free to add your datasets!

Maybe hyperlink the "add your datasets" phrase with documentation that a reader can refer to?

### Format
On the Hub, graph datasets are mostly stored as lists of graphs (using the `jsonl` format). 

> A single graph is a dictionnary, and here is the expected format for our graph classification datasets:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A single graph is a dictionary, and here is the expected format for our graph classification datasets:
```

	- Example: a graph containing four nodes (0, 1, 2 and 3) and where connections are 1->2, 1->3 and 3->1* will have `edge_index`=[[1, 1, 3], [2, 3, 1]]. You might notice here that node 0 is not present here, as it is not part of an edge per se. This is why the next attribute is important.
- `num_nodes` 
	- Type: integer 
	- It indicates the total number of nodes available in the graph (by default, it is assumed that nodes are numbered sequentially). 
	- Example: In our above example, `num_nodes` = 4.
- `y`
	- Type: list of either integers (for multi-class classification), floats (for regression), or lists of ones and zeroes (for binary multi-task classification)
	- It maps each graph to what we want to predict from it (be it a class, a property value, or several binary label for different tasks).
	- Example: We could predict if the graph is small sized (0), medium sized (1) or big. Here, `y` = [0].
- `node_feat` 
	- Type: list of lists of integer (Optional) 
	- This contains the available features (if present) for each node of the graph, ordered by node index.
- `edge_attr`
	- Type: list of lists of integers (Optional)

> 	- This contains the available attributes (if present) for each edge of the graph, following the `edge_index` ordering.

Reviewer: Do we need to provide examples for these two like the above three ones?

Author: It's very use case specific imo, people using/needing features will know what they have

### Loading

> Loading a graph dataset from the Hub is very easy. Let's load the `ogbg-mohiv` dataset (a baseline from the Open Graph Benchmark by Stanford), stored in the `OGB` repository: 

Reviewer: > a baseline from the Open Graph Benchmark by Stanford

Hyperlink?

> Loading a graph dataset from the hub is very easy. Let's load the `ogbg-mohiv` dataset (a baseline from the Open Graph Benchmark by Stanford), stored in the `graphs-datasets` repository: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Loading a graph dataset from the Hub is very easy. Let's load the `ogbg-mohiv` dataset (a baseline from the Open Graph Benchmark by Stanford), stored in the `graphs-datasets` repository: 
```

```python
from datasets import load_dataset

# There is only one split on the hub
dataset = load_dataset("OGB/ogbg-molhiv")

dataset = dataset.shuffle(seed=0)
```

This dataset already has three splits, `train`, `validation`, and `test`, and all these splits contain our 5 columns of interest (`edge_index`, `edge_attr`, `y`, `num_nodes`, `node_feat`), which you can see by doing `print(dataset)`. 

If you have other graph libraries, you can use them to plot your graphs and further inspect the dataset. For example, using PyGeometric and matplotlib:
```python
import networkx as nx
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

# We want to plot the first train graph
graph = dataset["train"][0]

edges = graph["edge_index"]
num_edges = len(edges[0])
num_nodes = graph["num_nodes"]

# Conversion to networkx format
G = nx.Graph()
G.add_nodes_from(range(num_nodes))
G.add_edges_from([(edges[0][i], edges[1][i]) for i in range(num_edges)])

# Plot
nx.draw(G)

> ```

Reviewer: Amazing!

### Preprocessing

> Graph transformer frameworks usually apply specific preprocessing to their datasets to generate added features and properties which help learning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Graph transformer frameworks usually apply specific preprocessing to their datasets to generate added features and properties which help the underlying learning task (classification in our case).
```

> Graph transformer frameworks usually apply specific preprocessing to their datasets, to generate added features and properties which help learning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Graph transformer frameworks usually apply specific preprocessing to their datasets to generate added features and properties which help learning.
```

> Here, we use the Graphormer's default preprocessing, which generates in/out degree information, shortest path between nodes matrices, and other properties of interest for the model. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here, we use Graphormer's default preprocessing, which generates in/out degree information, the shortest path between node matrices, and other properties of interest for the model. 
```

 
```python
from transformers.models.graphormer.collating_graphormer import preprocess_item, GraphormerDataCollator

dataset_processed = dataset.map(preprocess_item, batched=False)
```

> It is also possible to apply this preprocessing on the fly, in the DataCollator's parameters (by setting `on_the_fly_processing` to True): not all datasets are as small as `ogbg-molhiv`, and for large graphs, it might be too costly to store all the preprocessed data beforehand. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is also possible to create a new randomly initialized model to train from scratch, either following the known parameters of a given checkpoint or manually choosing them.
```

Author: I think this was a comma correction for the previous end of section.

Reviewer 3: I got the "ImportError: cannot import name 'algos_graphormer' from 'transformers.models.graphormer' " when run ''from transformers.models.graphormer.collating_graphormer import preprocess_item, GraphormerDataCollator'', should I build from resource code rather than use pip install transformers?

Author: Hi @gitabtion ! This blog post has not been published yet because I need to update it to follow the last version of the code - I'll come back to it soon and ping you when it's up to date :hugs:

## Training or fine-tuning

### Creating a model

> Here, we load an existing pretrained model/checkpoint and to fine-tune it on our downstream task, a binary classification task (hence `num_classes = 2`). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here, we load an existing pretrained model/checkpoint that can be fine-tuned on our downstream task, such as binary classification task (hence `num_classes = 2`). 
```

```python
from transformers import GraphormerForGraphClassification

> # To train from scratch

Reviewer: Aren't we fine-tuning from the checkpoint? If so, this comment seems to be a bit misleading to me. 

I would remove this comment and add some explanatory text below to discuss what the code block is doing and how one can randomly initialize the model in this case. You can refer to [this notebook](https://github.com/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/examples/image_classification.ipynb) to check how we usually discuss the former.  

Let me know if anything is unclear.

Author: We definitely are, it comes from a previous version of the code, well seen! :clap: :

model = GraphormerForGraphClassification.from_pretrained(
    "clefourrier/pcqm4mv2_graphormer_base",
    num_classes=2, # num_classes for the downstream task 
    ignore_mismatched_sizes=True,
)
```

> It is also possible to create a new randomly initialized model to train from scratch, either following the known parameters of a given checkpoint, or by manually choosing them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is also possible to create a new randomly initialized model to train from scratch either following the known parameters of a given checkpoint or by manually choosing them.
```

> ### Training or fine-tuning

Reviewer: This heading seems to be redundant as we already have it above.

Author: restructured headings

> For graph datasets, it is particularly important to play around with batch sizes and gradient accumulation steps, to train on enough samples, while avoiding out of memory errors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For graph datasets, it is particularly important to play around with batch sizes and gradient accumulation steps to train on enough samples while avoiding out-of-memory errors.
```

```python

> from transformers import TrainingArguments, Trainer

Reviewer: Maybe spend a sentence or two to tell the users what Trainer is and provide hyperlinks? [This notebook](https://github.com/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/examples/image_classification.ipynb) has a nice template of that description. But absolutely feel free to repurpose anything there.

Author: Thank you for the reference!

training_args = TrainingArguments(
    output_dir="tmp",
    logging_dir="tmp",
    per_device_train_batch_size=64,
    per_device_eval_batch_size=64,
    auto_find_batch_size=True, # batch size can be changed automatically to prevent OOMs
    gradient_accumulation_steps=10,
    dataloader_num_workers=4, #1, 
    num_train_epochs=20,
    evaluation_strategy="epoch",
    logging_strategy="epoch",

> )

Reviewer: Can we also do `push_to_hub` to True? If so, I would show that and also at the end of training, call `trainer.push_to_hub()` so that all the fine-tuned artifacts (parameters, metadata, etc.) are pushed to a model repository on the Hub.

Author: Yes, we can, I'll add it!

trainer = Trainer(
    model=model,
    args=training_args,
    train_dataset=dataset_processed["train"],
    eval_dataset=dataset_processed["validation"],
    data_collator=GraphormerDataCollator(),
)

trainer.train() 
```

> As this model is quite big, it takes about a day to train/fine-tune for 20 epochs on CPU (IntelCore i7). It can be worth using powerful GPUs and parallelization instead, leveraging `accelerate`.

Reviewer: `Trainer` internally leverages `accelerate`, actually. Maybe you could try running it on Colab (with a GPU)?

Also, I would make the readers aware of the following: how `Trainer` is able to train the model with an objective. Specifically, how is it inferring that information in the first place. This is made possible because the underlying model implements the loss computation part and also returns an object that `Trainer` can use to know the loss quantity.

Author: I used to run my code on GPUs on the cluster, but it needed me to explicitly invoke accelerate, using `accelerate launch my_scripts.py`, so I'm not sure I understand your comment there

Reviewer: So, Trainer will automatically use accelerate. For launching a script, you might need to do `accelerate launch`. But for Colab, it won't be necessary.

Author: Ok, I will edit the text

## Ending note

> Now that you know how to use `transformers` to train a graph classification model, we hope you will try to share your favorite graph transformer checkpoints, models and datasets on the hub for the rest of the community to use!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that you know how to use `transformers` to train a graph classification model, we hope you will try to share your favorite graph transformer checkpoints, models, and datasets on the Hub for the rest of the community to use!
```

> Now that you know how to use `transformers` to train a graph classification model, we hope you will try to share your favorite graph transformer checkpoints, models, and datasets on the Hub for the rest of the community to use!

Reviewer: Great conclusion and a passive call for action. Keeping this in mind, I think it would make even more sense to use `push_to_hub()`.

Reviewer: Also, can we also show some inference on the samples from the test set and discuss about it?

Author: Do you think it would be a big plus? 
I would need to retrain a model for this.

Reviewer: Maybe in an accompanying Colab Notebook? I do think discussing the inference section in isolation makes it more complete.

Author: Ok, that works for me! Do you have some pointers on how to do a Colab Notebook? :)

Author: I'm also not clear on how much the contents of the notebook should intersect with the contents of the blog post

Reviewer: Sure thing!

We can just add headers and copy-paste the code shown in the blog post. Let me know if anything's unclear.

---
title: "Graph Classification with Transformers" 
thumbnail: /blog/assets/125_intro-to-graphml/thumbnail_classification.png
---

# Graph classification with Transformers

<div class="blog-metadata">

>     <small>Published January 30, 2023.</small>

Reviewer 2: Please update :)

Here, we use Graphormer's default preprocessing, which generates in/out degree information, the shortest path between node matrices, and other properties of interest for the model. 
 
```python
from transformers.models.graphormer.collating_graphormer import preprocess_item, GraphormerDataCollator

dataset_processed = dataset.map(preprocess_item, batched=False)
```

It is also possible to apply this preprocessing on the fly, in the DataCollator's parameters (by setting `on_the_fly_processing` to True): not all datasets are as small as `ogbg-molhiv`, and for large graphs, it might be too costly to store all the preprocessed data beforehand. 

## Model

### Loading
Here, we load an existing pretrained model/checkpoint and fine-tune it on our downstream task, which is a binary classification task (hence `num_classes = 2`). We could also fine-tune our model on regression tasks (`num_classes = 1`) or on multi-task classification.
```python
from transformers import GraphormerForGraphClassification

model = GraphormerForGraphClassification.from_pretrained(

>     "clefourrier/pcqm4mv2_graphormer_base",

Author: TODO: change path of graphormer checkpoint
